java library instrumentation doc (#3568)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/java/libraries.md

Follow the instructions of each instrumentation library to set them up.

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

We will instrument an HTTP client application using library instrumentation
which will make a call to HTTP server.

You can use the dice example app as HTTP server from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or you can create
your own HTTP server.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

To begin, set up an environment in a new directory called
`java-simple-http-client`. Within that directory, create a file called
`build.gradle.kts` with the following content:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("application")
}

application {
  mainClass.set("otel.SampleHttpClient")
}

sourceSets {
  main {
    java.setSrcDirs(setOf("."))
  }
}

repositories {
  mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-logging:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry.semconv:opentelemetry-semconv:1.22.0-alpha");

>     implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:1.32.0");

Reviewer: Add `autoconfigure` to the cspell ignore list in the front matter (see other pages how this looks like, e.g. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/main/content/en/docs/instrumentation/java/exporters.md?plain=1#L4)

Author: done

    implementation("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-java-http-client:1.31.0-alpha");
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Add a not here that `maven` can be used of course as well and that the relevant dependency here is `io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-java-http-client:1.31.0-alpha`

Author: Added, Please check.

Reviewer 2: @svrnm - shouldn't we use tabbed panes in this case instead?

Reviewer 3: that would be nice here too: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#dependencies

Author: @chalin @trask I have improved with tabbed panes now, Please suggest if any more text need to add for same ?

Reviewer 2: Tabbed pane seems file. I'll let @svrnm give the final work as to whether this comment is resolved to his liking.

> that would be nice here too: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#dependencies

@trask - maybe we can open a separate issue for this?

Reviewer: @nerudadhich would it be a lot of effort to make this work with gradle and maven out of the box? If yes, let's keep it as is and have a separate issue for that, if no, feel free to update the PR accordingly. This would than nicely fit with the other existing documentation where we provide both

Author: Hi @svrnm I tired spending some time on this but I am not Maven expert if we can get someone's help would be great or I can still spend more time if we are not in rush.

import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.SdkTracerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export.SimpleSpanProcessor;

/**
 * All SDK management takes place here, away from the instrumentation code, which should only access
 * the OpenTelemetry APIs.
 */
class ExampleConfiguration {

  /**
   * Initializes the OpenTelemetry SDK with a logging span exporter and the W3C Trace Context
   * propagator.
   *
   * @return A ready-to-use {@link OpenTelemetry} instance.
   */
  static OpenTelemetry initOpenTelemetry() {
    SdkTracerProvider sdkTracerProvider =
        SdkTracerProvider.builder()
            .addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpanProcessor.create(new LoggingSpanExporter()))
            .build();

    OpenTelemetrySdk sdk =
        OpenTelemetrySdk.builder()
            .setTracerProvider(sdkTracerProvider)
            .setPropagators(ContextPropagators.create(W3CTraceContextPropagator.getInstance()))
            .build();

    Runtime.getRuntime().addShutdownHook(new Thread(sdkTracerProvider::close));
    return sdk;
  }
}
```

```java
// SampleHttpClient.java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.api.OpenTelemetry;

> import io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.httpclient.JavaHttpClientTelemetry;

Reviewer: add `httpclient` to the cspell ignore list as well

import java.net.http.HttpClient;

import java.net.URI;
import java.net.http.HttpClient;
import java.net.http.HttpHeaders;
import java.net.http.HttpRequest;
import java.net.http.HttpResponse;

public final class SampleHttpClient {
    //Init OpenTelemetry
    private static final OpenTelemetry openTelemetry = ExampleConfiguration.initOpenTelemetry();

    //Use this HttpClient implementation for making standard http client calls.
    public HttpClient createTracedClient(OpenTelemetry openTelemetry) {
        return JavaHttpClientTelemetry.builder(openTelemetry).build().newHttpClient(createClient());
    }

    //your configuration of the Java HTTP Client goes here:
    private HttpClient createClient() {
        return HttpClient.newBuilder().build();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        HttpRequest request = HttpRequest.newBuilder()
            .GET()

>             .uri(URI.create(System.getenv().getOrDefault("EXTERNAL_API_ENDPOINT", "http://localhost:8080/rolldice")))

Reviewer: add `getenv` to cspell ignore list

Author: done

    }

    //your configuration of the Java HTTP Client goes here:
    private HttpClient createClient() {
        return HttpClient.newBuilder().build();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        HttpRequest request = HttpRequest.newBuilder()
            .GET()
            .uri(URI.create(System.getenv().getOrDefault("EXTERNAL_API_ENDPOINT", "http://localhost:8080/rolldice")))
            //.setHeader("User-Agent", "Java 11 HttpClient Bot") // add request header
            .build();

        SampleHttpClient s = new SampleHttpClient();
        HttpResponse<String> response = s.createTracedClient(openTelemetry).send(request, HttpResponse.BodyHandlers.ofString());
        // print response headers
        HttpHeaders headers = response.headers();
        headers.map().forEach((k, v) -> System.out.println(k + ":" + v));
        // print status code
        System.out.println(response.statusCode());
        // print response body
        System.out.println(response.body());

    }
}
```

```sh
# .env
export OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=dice-client
export OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=logging
export OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=logging

> export OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=logging

Reviewer 4: these are not used

Author: Let me check and remove if not required.

Author: I have fixed this.

which standalone instrumentation libraries are available, take a look at
[this list](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).
Follow the instructions of each instrumentation library to set them up.

## Example app

We will instrument an HTTP client application using library instrumentation
which will make a call to HTTP server.

You can use the dice example app as HTTP server from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or you can create
your own HTTP server.

### Dependencies

To begin, set up an environment in a new directory called
`java-simple-http-client`. Within that directory, create a file called

> `build.gradle.kts` with the following content:

Reviewer 2: Adjust the mention of the filename here.

Author: Sure @chalin . Let me try something and get back.

Author: Hi @chalin I have added a note for Maven. Please suggest a change if needed.

Reviewer 2: I'm ok with the (adjusted) note (see my review comment of Jan 10).
@svrnm @theletterf - WDYT?

            //.setHeader("User-Agent", "Java 11 HttpClient Bot") // add request header
            .build();

        SampleHttpClient s = new SampleHttpClient();
        HttpResponse<String> response = s.createTracedClient(openTelemetry).send(request, HttpResponse.BodyHandlers.ofString());
        // print response headers
        HttpHeaders headers = response.headers();
        headers.map().forEach((k, v) -> System.out.println(k + ":" + v));
        // print status code
        System.out.println(response.statusCode());
        // print response body
        System.out.println(response.body());

    }
}
```

### Run

Use `EXTERNAL_API_ENDPOINT` environment variable to change external API
endpoint, by default it will point to `http://localhost:8080/rolldice` where
[example dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application)
is running.

To verify your code, run the app:

```sh
env \
OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=http-client \
OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=logging \
OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=logging \
OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=logging \
gradle run
```

When you run the app, the instrumentation libraries will do the following:

> - Start a new trace
> - Generate a span representing the request made to the external API endpoint
> - If you use an instrumented HTTP server (as in the
>   [dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application)),
>   then more trace spans will be generated having the same trace ID

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Start a new trace.
- Generate a span that represents the request made to the external API endpoint.
- If you use an instrumented HTTP server, as in the
  [dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application), 
  more trace spans are generated with the same trace ID.
```

## Available instrumentation libraries

For a full list of instrumentation libraries, see
[opentelemetry-java-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).

## Next steps

> After you have set up instrumentation libraries, you may want to add
> [manual instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/java/manual) to collect custom
> telemetry data.
> 
> You'll also want to configure an appropriate exporter to
> [export your telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/java/exporters) to one or
> more telemetry backends.
> 
> You can also check the
> [automatic instrumentation for Java](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic).
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After you've set up instrumentation libraries, you might want to add
[manual instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/java/manual) to collect custom
telemetry data.

You might also want to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export your telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/java/exporters) to one or
more telemetry backends.

You can also check the
[automatic instrumentation for Java](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic) for
existing library instrumentations.

```

which standalone instrumentation libraries are available, take a look at
[this list](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).
Follow the instructions of each instrumentation library to set them up.

> ## Example app preparation {#example-app}

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest dropping the custom header anchors here and elsewhere in the added text. They aren't required, and it'll keep the markdown clean.

> ## Example app preparation {#example-app}

Reviewer 2: Actually, we can also probably use a more concise title for this top-level heading:

```suggestion
## Example app
```

We will instrument an HTTP client application using library instrumentation
which will make a call to HTTP server.

You can use the dice example app as HTTP server from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or you can create
your own HTTP server.

> ### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Dependencies
```

`build.gradle.kts` with the following content:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("application")
}

application {
  mainClass.set("otel.SampleHttpClient")
}

sourceSets {
  main {
    java.setSrcDirs(setOf("."))
  }
}

repositories {
  mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-logging:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-java-http-client:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha");
}
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

In case you are using Maven the relevant dependency is here

```xml
<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-java-http-client</artifactId>
    <version>{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha</version>
  </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

{{% /alert %}}

> ### Setup {#example-app-setup}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup
```

        return JavaHttpClientTelemetry.builder(openTelemetry).build().newHttpClient(createClient());
    }

    //your configuration of the Java HTTP Client goes here:
    private HttpClient createClient() {
        return HttpClient.newBuilder().build();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
        HttpRequest request = HttpRequest.newBuilder()
            .GET()
            .uri(URI.create(System.getenv().getOrDefault("EXTERNAL_API_ENDPOINT", "http://localhost:8080/rolldice")))
            //.setHeader("User-Agent", "Java 11 HttpClient Bot") // add request header
            .build();

        SampleHttpClient s = new SampleHttpClient();
        HttpResponse<String> response = s.createTracedClient(openTelemetry).send(request, HttpResponse.BodyHandlers.ofString());
        // print response headers
        HttpHeaders headers = response.headers();
        headers.map().forEach((k, v) -> System.out.println(k + ":" + v));
        // print status code
        System.out.println(response.statusCode());
        // print response body
        System.out.println(response.body());

    }
}
```

> ### Run example app {#example-app-run}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Run
```

Use `EXTERNAL_API_ENDPOINT` environment variable to change external API
endpoint, by default it will point to `http://localhost:8080/rolldice` where
[example dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application)
is running.

To verify your code, run the app:

```sh
env \
OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=http-client \
OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=logging \
OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=logging \
OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=logging \
gradle run
```

> When you run this code, the instrumentation libraries will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run the app, the instrumentation libraries will to the following:
```

- Start a new trace
- Generate a span representing the request made to the external API endpoint

> - If you will use instrumented HTTP server eg.
>   [example dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application)
>   then more trace span will be generated which will have same trace ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you use an instrumented HTTP server (as in the [dice app](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/#example-application)),
  then more trace spans will be generated having the same trace ID
```

## Available instrumentation libraries

> A full list of instrumentation libraries produced by OpenTelemetry is available
> here
> [opentelemetry-java-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a full list of instrumentation libraries, see [opentelemetry-java-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).
```

[this list](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).
Follow the instructions of each instrumentation library to set them up.

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

We will instrument an HTTP client application using library instrumentation
which will make a call to HTTP server.

You can use the dice example app as HTTP server from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or you can create
your own HTTP server.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

To begin, set up an environment in a new directory called
`java-simple-http-client`. Within that directory, create a file called
`build.gradle.kts` with the following content:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("application")
}

application {
  mainClass.set("otel.SampleHttpClient")
}

sourceSets {
  main {
    java.setSrcDirs(setOf("."))
  }
}

repositories {
  mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}");

>     implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-metrics:{{% param vers.otel %}}");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-logging:{{% param vers.otel %}}");

>     implementation("io.opentelemetry.semconv:opentelemetry-semconv:{{% param vers.semconv %}}-alpha")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:{{% param vers.otel %}}");

>     implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-spi:{{% param vers.otel %}}");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

which standalone instrumentation libraries are available, take a look at
[this list](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md#libraries--frameworks).
Follow the instructions of each instrumentation library to set them up.

## Example app

The following example instruments an HTTP client application using library
instrumentation which calls an HTTP server.

You can use the dice example app as HTTP server from
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or you can create
your own HTTP server.

### Dependencies

Set up an environment in a new directory named `java-simple-http-client`. Inside
the directory, create a file named `build.gradle.kts` with the following
content:

{{% alert color="info" %}} Please note that this example is built with Gradle,
you might need to amend directory structure and pox.xml to run using Maven

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 6: `pox.xml` should be `pom.xml`

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 5: OK with it!

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 2: LOL, fixed!

> {{% /alert %}}

Author: fixed.

}

sourceSets {
  main {
    java.setSrcDirs(setOf("."))
  }
}

repositories {
  mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-logging:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:{{% param vers.otel %}}");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-java-http-client:{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha");
}
```

{{% /tab %}} {{% tab Maven %}}

```xml
<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-java-http-client</artifactId>
    <version>{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha</version>
  </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

{{< /tab >}} {{< /tabpane>}}

### Setup

The following example shows how you can instrument external API calls using
[Java HTTP client library](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/java-http-client/library):

> 

Reviewer 6: Perhaps mentioned that with Spring Boot the SDK (OpenTelemetry object) can be initialized with the OpenTelemetry starter: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/automatic/spring-boot

Author: Sure @jeanbisutti

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

To begin, set up an environment in a new directory called
`java-simple-http-client`. Within that directory, create a file called
`build.gradle.kts` with the following content:

```kotlin
plugins {
  id("java")
  id("application")
}

application {
  mainClass.set("otel.SampleHttpClient")
}

sourceSets {
  main {
    java.setSrcDirs(setOf("."))
  }
}

repositories {
  mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-logging:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry.semconv:opentelemetry-semconv:1.22.0-alpha");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:1.32.0");
    implementation("io.opentelemetry.instrumentation:opentelemetry-java-http-client:1.31.0-alpha");
}
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

In case you are using Maven the relevant dependency is here

```xml
<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry.instrumentation</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-java-http-client</artifactId>

>     <version>1.31.0-alpha</version>

Reviewer 3: (depending on outcome of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3580/files#r1406625737)
```suggestion
    <version>{{% param vers.instrumentation %}}-alpha</version>
```

import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.propagation.W3CTraceContextPropagator;
import io.opentelemetry.context.propagation.ContextPropagators;
import io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.SdkTracerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export.SimpleSpanProcessor;

/**
 * All SDK management takes place here, away from the instrumentation code, which should only access
 * the OpenTelemetry APIs.
 */
class ExampleConfiguration {

  /**
   * Initializes the OpenTelemetry SDK with a logging span exporter and the W3C Trace Context
   * propagator.
   *
   * @return A ready-to-use {@link OpenTelemetry} instance.
   */
  static OpenTelemetry initOpenTelemetry() {
    SdkTracerProvider sdkTracerProvider =
        SdkTracerProvider.builder()
            .addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpanProcessor.create(new LoggingSpanExporter()))
            .build();

    OpenTelemetrySdk sdk =
        OpenTelemetrySdk.builder()
            .setTracerProvider(sdkTracerProvider)
            .setPropagators(ContextPropagators.create(W3CTraceContextPropagator.getInstance()))
            .build();

>     Runtime.getRuntime().addShutdownHook(new Thread(sdkTracerProvider::close));

Reviewer 3: I'd recommend using [auto-configuration](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/#automatic-configuration)
